CMD: 
text-based interface used to execute commands, automate tasks via batch files, and manage system operations in Windows

To run press Win + R and type cmd and select command prompt 

based on MS-DOS and has been around since the 80s.

Uses simple commands like dir, cd, and copy.

can’t handle complex logic or "pipe" objects between commands easily.

a Pipe is a command that takes the output of one process and feeds it directly as the input to another.

ls | grep "Pro", ls command lists files, but instead of printing them to your screen, it sends them through the "pipe" to grep, which filters for files containing the word "Pro."

Logic commands allow a system to perform actions based on whether a condition is true or false. 
mkdir NewFolder && cd NewFolder (Only enters the folder if it was successfully created).
ping google.com || echo "Internet is down"  Only runs the second command if the first fails.


PowerShell
Basics: A modern, cross-platform task automation solution and scripting framework built on the .NET framework.

Data Handling: Unlike CMD or Bash, which are text-based, PowerShell is object-oriented. It pipes actual data objects rather than just lines of text.

Syntax: Uses a "Verb-Noun" structure called Cmdlets (e.g., Get-Service, Stop-Process, New-Item).

Usage: The standard for modern Windows system administration and complex enterprise automation.

Bash (Bourne Again Shell)
Basics: The default shell for most Linux distributions and macOS. It is the "universal language" of web servers and cloud computing.

Logic: Heavily focused on small, modular tools that interact through text streams.

Highly efficient for string manipulation and file processing.

Access on Windows: Available via WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) or Git Bash.


Zsh (Z Shell)
Basics: An extended version of Bash with many improvements and powerful features. It is now the default shell on macOS.

Features: Includes advanced tab-completion, spelling correction, and "globbing" (advanced file searching).

Customization: Highly popular due to frameworks like "Oh My Zsh," which allow users to add themes and plugins for a highly visual and productive terminal experience.

Fish (Friendly Interactive Shell)
Basics: A smart, user-friendly shell designed to be "discoverable." It focuses on being helpful out of the box without needing complex configuration.

Features: Offers "autosuggestions" (gray text that predicts what you want to type based on history) and syntax highlighting as you type.

Difference: Unlike Bash or Zsh, it does not strictly follow the POSIX standard, meaning some standard Bash scripts might not run in Fish without modification.



Anaconda (Conda)
Basics: Not a shell itself, but a distribution and package manager (conda) used within shells.

Purpose: Specifically designed for Python/R data science and machine learning.

Environments: Allows you to create "virtual environments" to keep project dependencies separate (e.g., Project A uses Python 3.8, while Project B uses Python 3.12).

Interface: Usually accessed via the "Anaconda Prompt," which is a standard shell (CMD or PowerShell) pre-configured with the Conda paths.